
6 June 2019

Hi Phil,

Am looking for the sub-daily pressure readings (raw and adjusted) from your
2006 IJC paper on the Liverpool pressure series. Do you still have copies please?

Many thanks,
Ed.

Prof Ed Hawkins
Professor of Climate Science, Dept. of Meteorology, Univ. of Reading
and
Principal Research Scientist, National Centre for Atmospheric Science

EMAIL:    e.hawkins@reading.ac.uk
WEB:      www.met.reading.ac.uk/~ed/

10 June 2019

Ed - sorry for the delay. I had visitors last week.

Also, I had to get my head around things again since 2006. I usually
keep decent notes but it is always a challenge to go back a few years.

A first thing to mention is that most of the 'Liverpool' record
in the paper came from Bidston and they were monthly means only.
I think what happened is that the sub-daily values (3 hourly?) went to the Met Office,
Bidston being only a secondary 'climatological' met station I think. They
will have computed the monthlies which Bidston staff kept a record of through
the years. These will have been the values that appeared in the Monthly Notices
of the Met Office.

I spoke to Colin Bell this morning. Colin was in charge of the met data before we moved
across to L'pool. He remembers that the 3 hourly data from maybe 1980 were also
kept at Bidston in books which went to Wirral Archives when we moved over to L'pool. I guess
that doesn't help you much. But we never kept sub-daily data from before then.

I must admit that I never made the attempt to enquire at the Met Office if they had
archived the sub-dailies as the monthlies were enough for me at the time. So if you want
any them now you will have to enquire there. Colin also had
sub-daily values from Bidston for the recent era when there was an automatic
station but not for many years and I recall that there were problems with that data.
There was/is also a climatological station at Ness Gardens not far away but I don't
know how far back the records from there go (after WW2?).

So the only data I have that might be called sub-daily are the Prince's Dock values and
the earlier Hutchinson measurements which was what most of the paper was about. However,
I am not sure whether they are of use for you in a 'sub-daily' sense as the Prince's air
pressures were collected at high tides (about twice a day) only and the Hutchinson values
were at noon every day as explained in the paper.

Anyway, here are some files and get back to me when you have had a look in case others
are relevant.

Phil


Prince's Dock data
==================

The numbers in 'princes.barometer' come from photographs of sheets held
in the Royal Society library. I took photos of all the Prince's sheets which
were quite black, and images of 1827 and 1828 for Salthouse Dock as a test.
The Salthouse sheets were very faint. Prince's period covered July 1827 to
August 1835. November 1830 and November 1832 are missing. Some notes:

1. the sheets show barometer at the time of high tides (Morning/Evening) so the sampling
will be different to other data sets (two per day, or sometimes only one)

2. some of the Prince's sheets even hard to read. some suspect barometer
values marked by ?? after a guess at the value

3. very few gaps for 'off sick'

4. some short periods make you suspect rounding off of the second
decimal place as for parts of the William Hutchinson data e.g. see December 1830
or February 1831

==> 'princes.barometer' given to Rob Allan (May 2006).

This file shows the barometer values sequentially for each month without
including the times for an individual value. You realise I was interested only
in making monthly mean values of the barometer values and so I wasn't too
interested in the actual date and time. However, I do still have the photos
e.g. see 'IMG_0819.jpg' attached as an example. If these would be of interest,
and save you a trip to London, then I can zip them up.

Hutchinson data
===============

Barometer values were typed in by a summer student called
Peter Burgess during June 2004 using the microfilm copies of Hutchinson's
records held at Local Studies in Liverpool Central Library.

They were concatonated into 'wh.barometer' before checking.

Peter and I checked Peter's typing using the originals (i.e. originals in
microfilm form) up to july 1780, then from the Lang copies because of 
the page overlap obscuring the numbers on the originals. The Lang copies
are copies of the original Hutchinson records made in the 19th century
by a local printer called Lang. They are held at the Athenaeum Library
in Liverpool.

Peter had typed in the numbers in the same way consistently (i.e. from
originals then  from Lang, maybe more from the originals nearer the end
of the records than we did in our checking). When we couldn't understand
a value in one or the other, then we checked the alternative copy. The
whole thing was double or triple checked. Hutchinson's handwriting was
easy to read once you got used to it, and Lang's was very clear. 

Notes:

1. wh measured air pressure to 1/10 inch, then in 1/100 inch from 
what appears to have been 16 June 1768 when 'he left town to go
for london' which somehow stimulated the extra decimal place.

We had to go back and check all again as we had read e.g. 
30 5 as 30.5 the first time around when it should have been read as 30.05.
Those  written 30.50 for example will of course appear in our file as 30.5.

2. note later data (e.g. june 1791) shows signs of rounding off to 
1/10 inch anyway, maybe he was running down! This needs some 
statistics compiling.

3. X = missing values as WH away ('from home') or whatever

4. feb 1771 original is missing in microfilm so we used lang
   apr 1776 original is repeated in the microfilm

5. 26 July 1787 - barometer 'out of order', restarts 4 August.

   10-11-12/1789 - no remarks about the barometer (as we would have
   expected from our later studies)

In Jan 2007, a year or so after the 2006 paper was written, we
decided to edit a few of the entries when further checks were
made for a CD of all Hutchinson's met data which I can send if you
would like one. The CD includes his temperature and rainfall records
as discussed in the paper.

The values in 'wh.barometer' were used to make monthly means of air
pressure in 'monthlies_baro.jan07' which were 'adjusted' into the file
'monthlies_baro_adjusted.jan07' by dividing into sections and comparing
to Edinburgh as explained in the paper. (The 'jan07' in the file names
refers to the slightly edited files following the paper). And to get to
the annual means shown in Figure 7 they were 'readjusted' as again
described in the paper by applying a simple offset. If the procedures are
not clear let me know. I did not make adjustments to individual values.

The Prince's monthly values were also 'readjusted' to be consistent with the
others following a similar procedure. (There was no 'adjusted' step
in this case).

These files were sent to Rob Allan and Gill Compo for the ACRE collection.

